FR #962: Add Correction Handling and Delivery Handling attributes and refactor Invoice Handling (#1501)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/attributes/delivery_handling.md

# Delivery Handling

## Overview

The Delivery Handling attribute defines how a data generator delivers a *dataset artifact* to a customer.

### Delivery Mechanisms

FOCUS supports two delivery mechanisms:

* Overwrite. Existing rows are replaced.
* Append. Existing rows are preserved.

> These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, and hybrid implementations are common, allowing data generators to meet specific technical and auditability requirements.

Reviewer: Not sure if the hybrid approach should be treated as a first-class delivery mechanism rather than mentioned only implicitly. If needed, we could introduce it as a third delivery mechanism, elaborate further and include example scenarios.

Reviewer: Discussed in TF-1 on Jan 27. It was agreed not to introduce Hybrid as a third option. A hybrid example mentioned for illustration. Resolving.

For more information on corrections, see the [Correction Handling attribute](*correctionhandling).

#### Overwrite Delivery

> In the Overwrite delivery mechanism, each *dataset artifact* provides a complete snapshot of data for a given [*billing period*](#glossary:billing-period), based on the data available at the time of delivery. Subsequent *dataset artifacts* typically reflect updates, additions, or omissions relative to the previous snapshot. This mechanism provides delivery simplicity, but it lacks inherent auditability.

Reviewer: Assumption: Each delivery is considered equivalent to a dataset artifact. Depending on the format and size of the data, a dataset artifact may include multiple files, but it is still treated as a single dataset artifact.

```suggestion
In the Overwrite delivery mechanism, each *dataset artifact* provides a complete snapshot of data for a given [*billing period*](#glossary:billing-period), based on the data available at the time of delivery. Each subsequent *dataset artifact* supersedes the previously delivered artifact and reflects any updates, additions, or omissions relative to the previous snapshot. This mechanism provides delivery simplicity but lacks inherent auditability.
```

Subsequent *dataset artifacts* using the Overwrite mechanism may include the following:

* Unchanged records are carried over.
* Updated records overwrite previous values.
* Additional records supplement previously delivered data.
* Omitted records are removed if no longer applicable.

#### Append Delivery

In the Append delivery mechanism, a subsequent *dataset artifact* appends new records without modifying or removing previously delivered ones. This mechanism inherently supports auditability, as all original and correction records are retained.

Subsequent *dataset artifacts* using the Append mechanism may include the following:

* Unchanged recorded are not included.
* Updated records are recorded as new entries, representing the difference.
* Additional records supplement previously delivered data.
* Omitted records are recorded as new entries, representing the reversal.

## Attribute ID

DeliveryHandling

## Attribute Name

Delivery Handling

## Description

Defines how a data generator delivers a *dataset artifact* to a customer.

## Requirements

The delivery of a *dataset artifact* adheres to the following requirements:

> * A FOCUS *dataset artifact* SHOULD be delivered using either the Overwrite or Append delivery mechanism.

Reviewer: I suggest we remove this, given that hybrid implementations are explicitly allowed and quite common in practice. The key is to ensure that the delivery mechanism implementation is properly documented, as specified in the remaining requirement.
```suggestion
```

# Delivery Handling

## Overview

The Delivery Handling attribute defines how data generator delivers [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) to customer.

A [*dataset instance*](#glossary:dataset-instance) represents a specific implementation of a [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset). A [*dataset instance artifact*](#glossary:dataset-instance-artifact) is the physical delivery of that instance, representing one or more records, independent of storage or transport boundaries (e.g., files, batches, or responses).

> ### Delivery Mechanisms

Author: ```suggestion
## Delivery Mechanisms
```

Reviewer: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156)

Author: Resolving with no action.

FOCUS recognizes two *FOCUS datasets* delivery mechanisms:

* Overwrite: Each delivery provides a complete snapshot, superseding any previously delivered *dataset artifact* for the same [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope) (e.g., temporal grouping such as a [*billing period*](#glossary:billing-period) or non-temporal, logical grouping such as a [*contract*](#glossary:contract)).
* Append: Each delivery adds new data, while previously delivered *dataset artifacts* are preserved.

Overwrite and Append mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, and hybrid implementations are common in practice, allowing data generators to meet specific technical and auditability requirements.

> For example, for Cost and Usage *FOCUS datasets*, a data generator may use Overwrite mechanism for *dataset artifacts* corresponding to an [*open billing period*](#closed-billing-period), ensuring the snapshot reflects the most recent state, while using Append mechanism for [*closed billing periods*](#glossary:closed-billing-period) to preserve historical data and support auditing of corrections to previously *closed billing periods* (i.e., [*charges*](#glossary:charge) with Charge Class set to "Correction").

Author: ```suggestion
For example, for Cost and Usage *FOCUS datasets*, a data generator may use Overwrite mechanism for *dataset artifacts* corresponding to an [*open billing period*](#open-billing-period), ensuring the snapshot reflects the most recent state, while using Append mechanism for [*closed billing periods*](#glossary:closed-billing-period) to preserve historical data and support auditing of corrections to previously *closed billing periods* (i.e., [*charges*](#glossary:charge) with Charge Class set to "Correction").
```

Reviewer: good catch! thanks!

> For more information on corrections, see the [Correction Handling attribute](*correctionhandling).

Author: ```suggestion
For more information on corrections, see the [Correction Handling attribute](#attributes.correctionhandling).
```

> #### Overwrite Delivery

Author: ```suggestion
### Overwrite Delivery
```

Reviewer: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156)

Author: Resolving with no action.

In the Overwrite delivery mechanism, each *dataset artifact* provides a complete snapshot of data for a predefined scope (e.g., a *billing period* or a logical grouping), based on the data available at the time of delivery. Subsequent *dataset artifacts* for the same scope typically reflect updates, additions, or omissions relative to the previous snapshot. This mechanism provides delivery simplicity, but it lacks inherent auditability.

Subsequent *dataset artifacts* using the Overwrite mechanism may include the following:

* Unchanged records are carried over.
* Updated records overwrite previous values.
* Additional records supplement previously delivered data.
* Omitted records are removed if no longer applicable.

> #### Append Delivery

Author: ```suggestion
### Append Delivery
```

Reviewer: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156)

Author: Resolving with no action.

Subsequent *dataset artifacts* using the Append mechanism may include the following:

* Unchanged records are not included.
* Updated records are recorded as new entries, representing the net effect on aggregated quantities or costs.
* Additional records supplement previously delivered data.
* Omitted records are recorded as new entries, representing the reversal.

## Attribute ID

DeliveryHandling

## Attribute Name

Delivery Handling

## Description

Defines how data generator delivers *FOCUS dataset* to customer.

## Requirements

*FOCUS dataset* delivered by a data generator MUST adhere to the following Delivery Handling requirements:

* *FOCUS dataset* MUST have its mechanism(s) for delivering *dataset artifacts* documented and accessible to practitioners (including whether Overwrite or Append is used and under which conditions).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST have delivered *dataset artifacts* accompanied by corresponding [FOCUS Metadata](#metadata).

> * *FOCUS dataset* MUST have its mechanism for correlating *dataset artifact* with the corresponding [FOCUS Metadata Schema object](#metadata.schema) documented and accessible to practitioners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *FOCUS dataset* SHOULD have delivered *dataset artifacts* accompanied by corresponding [FOCUS Metadata](#metadata).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST have its mechanism for correlating *dataset artifact* with the [FOCUS Metadata Schema object](#metadata.schema) documented and accessible to practitioners when the Metadata is delivered.
```

> * *FOCUS dataset* MUST have information contained in the delivered *dataset artifacts* accurately reflected in corresponding Metadata elements.

Reviewer: ### Metadata Feature Level unclear

These requirements are currently formulated using **MUST**, but it is not yet fully clear whether it should remain MUST or be a SHOULD, because FOCUS Metadata does not currently specify whether the existence of Metadata is mandatory – only recommendations for its format and accessibility are provided.

Attaching relevant Metadata, Schema, and Column Definition normative requirements.

> *Metadata adheres to the following requirements:*
>
> * *Data generators SHOULD provide FOCUS metadata in a format that is accessible programmatically, such as a file, website, API, or table.*
> * *Data generators SHOULD provide documentation on their implementation of the FOCUS metadata.*

**Question:** Is FOCUS metadata Mandatory or Recommended? @rileyjenk, thoughts?

---

### DRY

Following the **DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)** principle, all applicable [Metadata](#metadata) normative requirements are implied. For example, Schema, Recency, TimeSectors, etc. MUST accurately reflect the columns and data in delivered dataset artifacts.  

By this principle, even this third requirement ("*FOCUS dataset MUST have information contained in the delivered dataset artifacts...*") could potentially be considered redundant.

Reviewer 2: In general the requirements for a thing should be where the thing is. In other words metadata location should have its requirements. 

Also from a tactical perspective while the intent was to require metadata, the MUST is missing (phrased a different way).

Reviewer: discussed in TF-1. agreed on DRY. resolving

> * *FOCUS dataset* MUST have information contained in the delivered *dataset artifacts* accurately reflected in corresponding Metadata elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Delivery Handling

## Overview

> The Delivery Handling attribute defines how data generator delivers [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) to customer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Delivery Handling attribute defines how a [*data generator*](#metadata.datagenerator) delivers a [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) to a customer.
```

Missing articles ("a data generator", "a FOCUS dataset", "a customer"). Also links "data generator" per its metadata anchor, consistent with how dataset_completeness.md references it.

A [*dataset instance*](#glossary:dataset-instance) represents a specific implementation of a [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset). A [*dataset instance artifact*](#glossary:dataset-instance-artifact) is the physical delivery of that instance, representing one or more records, independent of storage or transport boundaries (e.g., files, batches, or responses).

### Delivery Mechanisms

> FOCUS recognizes two *FOCUS datasets* delivery mechanisms:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
FOCUS recognizes two *FOCUS dataset* delivery mechanisms:
```

"FOCUS datasets" (plural) should be "FOCUS dataset" (singular modifier). The current phrasing reads as "two datasets' delivery mechanisms" rather than "two mechanisms for delivering a dataset."

Reviewer: accepted. resolving.

* Overwrite: Each delivery provides a complete snapshot, superseding any previously delivered *dataset artifact* for the same [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope) (e.g., temporal grouping such as a [*billing period*](#glossary:billing-period) or non-temporal, logical grouping such as a [*contract*](#glossary:contract)).
* Append: Each delivery adds new data, while previously delivered *dataset artifacts* are preserved.

Overwrite and Append mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, and hybrid implementations are common in practice, allowing data generators to meet specific technical and auditability requirements.

> For example, for Cost and Usage *FOCUS datasets*, a data generator may use Overwrite mechanism for *dataset artifacts* corresponding to an [*open billing period*](#open-billing-period), ensuring the snapshot reflects the most recent state, while using Append mechanism for [*closed billing periods*](#glossary:closed-billing-period) to preserve historical data and support auditing of corrections to previously *closed billing periods* (i.e., [*charges*](#glossary:charge) with Charge Class set to "Correction").

Author: ```suggestion
For example, for Cost and Usage *FOCUS datasets*, a data generator may use Overwrite mechanism for *dataset artifacts* corresponding to an [*open billing period*](#glossary:open-billing-period), ensuring the snapshot reflects the most recent state, while using Append mechanism for [*closed billing periods*](#glossary:closed-billing-period) to preserve historical data and support auditing of corrections to previously *closed billing periods* (i.e., [*charges*](#glossary:charge) with Charge Class set to "Correction").
```

Subsequent *dataset artifacts* using the Overwrite mechanism may include the following:

* Unchanged records are carried over.
* Updated records overwrite previous values.
* Additional records supplement previously delivered data.
* Omitted records are removed if no longer applicable.

#### Append Delivery

In the Append delivery mechanism, a subsequent *dataset artifact* appends new records without modifying or removing previously delivered ones. This mechanism inherently supports auditability, as all original and correction records are retained. Total data volume increases over time as all delivered dataset artifacts are preserved, and is typically higher compared to Overwrite delivery.

Subsequent *dataset artifacts* using the Append mechanism may include the following:

* Unchanged records are not included.
* Updated records are recorded as new entries, representing the net effect on aggregated quantities or costs.
* Additional records supplement previously delivered data.
* Omitted records are recorded as new entries, representing the reversal.

## Attribute ID

DeliveryHandling

## Attribute Name

Delivery Handling

## Description

> Defines how data generator delivers *FOCUS dataset* to customer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Defines how a [*data generator*](#metadata.datagenerator) delivers a *FOCUS dataset* to a customer.
```

Same grammar fix as the overview. Description should match.

Reviewer: Accepting the suggestion.

Just a note that I've mentioned these references to **data generator** in [this comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/1878#issuecomment-4173262710) in #1878

## Requirements

DeliveryHandling MUST adhere to the following requirements:

* *FOCUS dataset* MUST have its mechanism(s) for delivering *dataset artifacts* documented and accessible to practitioners (including whether Overwrite or Append is used and under which conditions).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST NOT require practitioners to deduplicate records within or across delivered dataset artifacts.
* When using Overwrite delivery mechanism, *FOCUS dataset* MUST adhere to the following additional requirements:

>   * *FOCUS dataset* MUST represent a complete snapshot for a given *delivery scope*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * *FOCUS dataset* MUST represent a complete snapshot for a given [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope).
```

First occurrence of "delivery scope" in the Requirements section (a separate `##` section from Overview). Per editorial guidelines, glossary terms are linked on first occurrence per section.

Reviewer: accepted. resolving
